README.md, before:

# Bioinformatics training at the Norwegian Veterinary Institute


## Purpose
At the Norwegian Veterinary Institute, we are now starting an internal course in bioinformatics. This 
repo will contain information, documentation, tutorials etc for this course.


## Instructors

The instructors are:

  * Karin Lagesen - comparative genomics and main organizer
  * Arvind Sundaram - transcriptomics
  * Thomas Haverkamp - metagenomics


## Tentative schedule


| Date| Subject| Taught by|
|------|-------|----------|
|2017-11-30 (full day)| Virtualbox, File system, UNIX part I |Thomas/Karin|
|2017-12-07 (full day) | UNIX part II, Abel, SLURM, ssh, File transfer (scp, rsync), editor (nano)| Arvind/Karin|
|2017-12-14 (full day)|QC - FastQC, Trimmomatic and cutadapt, duplicates (samtools)|Arvind|
|2018-01-11| Jupyter as interface, Intro to Python|Karin|
|2018-01-18 |Intro to R|Thomas|
|2018-01-25|File formats|Arvind|
|2018-02-01 to 2018-03-29|Case study* (8 Weeks) | All|
|2018-04-05|Second common course, Git, Github| |
|2018-04-12|Nextflow| Karin|
|2018-04-19|Jupyter + Panda| Karin"
|2018-04-26|???| | 
|2018-05-03 onwards |Analyse own data | All|


## Practical information

### Computers

All participants will be handed a laptop with Virtualbox installed. All 
particpants are expected to handle this laptop with care, and to ensure that
nobody gets access to it. 

### Virtualbox
Virtualbox is a program that enables you to have a computer running virtually
inside your computer. You will "install" a specific version of linux inside
virtualbox. This is what we will use to interface with the cluster that we will
use for processing the data.


### Abel
We will use the University of Oslo's High Performance Computing cluster for 
most of our work. For more about how Abel works. see here.

Please note: transfer and storage of data on abel is only allowed with prior
approval by Karin.


## Contact

To contact the instructors, please leave an issue in the github repo. Karin is 
also available on twitter, as @karinlag .

Veterinary Institute people can contact Karin Lagesen on her veterinary 
institute email.

Commit message:

Created pages for each stream, added etherpad info

README.md, after:

# Bioinformatics training at the Norwegian Veterinary Institute


## Purpose
At the Norwegian Veterinary Institute, we are now starting an internal course in bioinformatics. This 
repo will contain information, documentation, tutorials etc for this course.


## Instructors

The instructors are:

  * Karin Lagesen - comparative genomics and main organizer
  * Arvind Sundaram - transcriptomics
  * Thomas Haverkamp - metagenomics


## Tentative schedule


| Date| Subject| Taught by|
|------|-------|----------|
|2017-11-30 (full day)| Virtualbox, File system, UNIX part I |Thomas/Karin|
|2017-12-07 (full day) | UNIX part II, Abel, SLURM, ssh, File transfer (scp, rsync), editor (nano)| Arvind/Karin|
|2017-12-14 (full day)|QC - FastQC, Trimmomatic and cutadapt, duplicates (samtools)|Arvind|
|2018-01-11| Jupyter as interface, Intro to Python|Karin|
|2018-01-18 |Intro to R|Thomas|
|2018-01-25|File formats|Arvind|
|2018-02-01 to 2018-03-29|Case study* (8 Weeks) | All|
|2018-04-05|Second common course, Git, Github| |
|2018-04-12|Nextflow| Karin|
|2018-04-19|Jupyter + Panda| Karin"
|2018-04-26|???| | 
|2018-05-03 onwards |Analyse own data | All|


## Course pages

We have created specific pages for each part of the course.

  * [Common introduction](introduction.md)
  * [Comparative genomics](compgenomics.md)
  * [Metagenomics](metagenomics.md)
  * [Transcriptomics](transcriptomics.md)


## Practical information

### Etherpad

An Etherpad is a collaborative document where all can write down notes,
tips, hints, links etc. Please note, this document is public, and hence,
you should not write anything there that you wouldn't talk about on
the bus on your way to work!

[You can find the etherpad for this course here](https://github.com/NorwegianVeterinaryInstitute/BioinfTraining.git)

### Computers

All participants will be handed a laptop with Virtualbox installed. All 
particpants are expected to handle this laptop with care, and to ensure that
nobody gets access to it. 

### Virtualbox
Virtualbox is a program that enables you to have a computer running virtually
inside your computer. You will "install" a specific version of linux inside
virtualbox. This is what we will use to interface with the cluster that we will
use for processing the data.

### Abel
We will use the University of Oslo's High Performance Computing cluster for 
most of our work. For more about how Abel works. see here.

Please note: transfer and storage of data on abel is only allowed with prior
approval by Karin.

You can find out more about [how to use abel here.](https://github.com/NorwegianVeterinaryInstitute/Info/wiki)


## Contact

To contact the instructors, please leave an issue in the github repo. Karin is 
also available on twitter, as @karinlag .

Veterinary Institute people should contact the instructors on the instructors
email list, or contact Karin via her vetinst email.
